General LeMay arrived at about the Vietnamese
situation and their air force, your air bases?
Well, he came in and visited not only our own air
bases, which I think we had two at the time, but he
went out and visited some of the Vietnamese
commands. And I don't know that we really... came
to any conclusion, you really don't come to any
conclusion when you're just following some
four-star general around
where he has a massive staff with him and he's just
looking at the situation, getting appraised of
what was going on out there. Okay, well what were
your impressions? You must have been coming from
Hawaii and going to this primitive land. You must
have had some impression about our capabilities
of fighting that war. Well, I would say that your
impression was you couldn't really depend on the
Vietnamese people to do very much of your fighting
for you, unless you took a long time in training
them. and organizing these mountain guard
backwoodsmen into the fighting force.
I don't know. You look at the problem of just
communications.
Certainly these old mountain guard people are
certainly not going to learn any English, or not
very much.
trying to train a foreigner in the English
language for him to fight your war. It was a major
problem. Do you think that was a major problem of
American strategy? Let me answer that.
Do you think that part of the problem of American
military was being rather Gung-ho on the war in
Vietnam was, I mean, that we set ourselves up as we
can't win this war. You're talking about all the
problems now. Did the military back in 1962
perceive all these problems, or was it just a
can-do type feeling? No, I think it's a matter of
the strategy of just gradually putting another
small I really think the strategy that we had at
that time was a small build up to just almost stay
even with Yvette Kahn.
It was only much later I think that we even
committed major forces and had we committed those
two or three years earlier, we probably would have
gotten the job done. But we were always just
committing enough of the force to kind of stay
even. Of course, this is what we're talking about
now, Secretary McNamara's idea of flexible
response. Do you remember what your thoughts
about flexible response were and what your
commander's thoughts about McNamara? Well,
see your problem in the military, your commanders
really don't get involved in all the top secret
information that you have at the headquarters.
And like the commander Masawa, he's completely
out of the picture. I mean, they don't provide you
any information up there. You have a different
mission altogether. So your commander of your
13th Air Force, who was in the Philippines, who was
supporting the Vietnamese war, and then you had a
brigadier general at that time, chief of the
military assistance group over in Dunham, so that
you don't really have a lot of people coming in and
pounding the desk and saying, let's do this and
let's do that. What about at the Pacific Air Force
headquarters? What about there? Four-star
general, he must have had some dealings with that.
uh... secretary of defense well yeah i hear any
scuttle about uh... what they thought about well
you're uh...
you don't you don't uh... i don't think you i don't
think you hear general o'donnell uh... pounding
his desk and saying mcnamara is crazy i mean you
just don't you don't do that type of thing. I just
don't think that you really criticize your
superiors before your juniors. It's a
know-it-all type of thing. Now, I have met with
Michael Mayer when he came out to the PACCOM
headquarters and where he gave you a briefing. his
staff would give you a briefing or you'd give him a
briefing first as to what the status of activities
were. But you didn't have your commander sitting
around pounding and saying that this guy's crazy
because he's just not being a good commander. When
you met McNamara, what were your impressions?
He was a whiz kid type of thing, and of course he's
the one that set up the program of retiring people
over 55. You weren't too excited about it. I wasn't
too excited about it, no. And I'm wondering what
his ideas on retirement are today. Certainly it's
not the idea that you that he should be put out to
pasture by the time he's fifty-five because he's
beyond that age now and I still say he's still
working. He's retiring next year I think, or at the
end of this year as the president of the World Bank,
but he's way over fifty-five. Yes, right. Okay, do
you remember, you said that you wrote a report, you
and General LeMay, or you had some input on that.
report on the mission, your visit to Vietnam. Do
you remember anything that you said in that
report? No, I really don't. I was looking through
my files where I was searching for my resume and
this type of thing. I ran across
a document which covered General LeMay's trip to
Vietnam, but I don't remember anything about it.
Was he in pretty good humor to see you again? Oh
yeah, he always remembered me.
Well, I think that we should talk about what you
think, after 30 years in the service, are the
highlights of your career and what we might call
the low points if we can. It seems to me like some of
the major highlights, a commander of the 39th Air
Division, seems like one of the jobs that you
enjoyed the most. And then, of course, when you
were the commander of the 379th down in Homestead,
sounds like you were very interested then in the
823rd. Am I right in those assumptions? Well, I
basically like to be boss. I mean, I'm... And of
course, I think that the jobs that I had in the Air
Force were real quality jobs. I mean, being, well,
going, I'd say my first big job was the radio school
at Sioux Falls, South Dakota, where you build it
from scratch with using a having available to you a
bunch of second lieutenants and you were the
lieutenant colonel and the second senior officer
on the base, why that job I enjoyed. I would say the
next job I enjoyed was the radar school down in Boca
Raton, Florida. Setting that up. Ends up setting
that up. I'm not a I'm not a particularly strong
staff guy. I like to be out, rather than sitting
behind a desk writing papers, I like to be out
generating enthusiasm in people.
Then from there, commanding the security service
was a very challenging job. You're talking about a
low point. I would say that when I was removed from
being commander of security service up to the
deputy director of NSA, although the jobs were
equivalent, I thought I was being moved out and
replaced by a higher-ranking colonel who at the
same time was promoted to BG. So did you consider
that job as the deputy director of the National
Security Agency sort of a setback? Oh, yeah. Yeah,
I consider that a setback. A demotion? Would you
consider it a demotion? Well, you can't really say
a demotion. As far as I was concerned, it was a
demotion. I mean, it was an equal-status job.
Yeah. And of course, I was Wade Jr. to General Lynn,
or Roy Lynn, who replaced me as Commander of the
Security Service. And he was promoted at the same
time he was moved in to a BG-7 grade. So I figured I'd
work my tail off getting the Security Service
organized, and then he gets promoted and comes
down and take over a pretty well-run
organization.
And you wanted that job. Well, I was interested in
keeping the job. But you wanted the star and you
wanted... Well, I was interested in a job and I was
interested in promotion. Sure. And so therefore,
at that time, I figured that maybe I wasn't going to
get promoted. And because... Neither one of the
deputies were, although they were one star slots,
neither one of them had been promoted. Navy, Army,
or the Air Force. And
I'd say that was a low spot anyway. I was unhappy
with the job at being director. And it was at this
time when you were getting your MBA and
considering of getting out of the service. Yeah,
if I didn't move from, I was willing to put up with it
for a couple of years. And then from there. There
you have four command jobs in a row. Then from there
you go to 379th Bomb Wing, which is a very, that job I
thoroughly enjoyed. And being a commander of
eight 23rd Air Division was a step up and you got
promoted. Being moved out of that job into a MAG
job, I figured that was a demotion. Although both
of them were occupied by a Major General, I mean a
Brigadier General. So I replaced the Brigadier
General. You can't say it was demotion as far as I
was concerned. But it wasn't a command. Well, it
wasn't a command job. Then of course you moved to
the 39th Air Division. I moved to Sawa. And again,
that was a good job. And the two jobs that I had in
PACAF headquarters were real good jobs. I mean, I
thoroughly enjoyed them. And because you were
almost a deputy commander there in your
particular field and you had a lot of
responsibility. What was your favorite job of
your entire career? Well, I would say that your
Sioux Falls, South Dakota
was a real good job. I mean I thoroughly enjoyed
that. thoroughly enjoyed, well the one at the
radar school was not as enjoyable because I wasn't
technically qualified as a radar officer. I mean I
was, you were directing an organization in which
you weren't technically qualified to supervise
the technical aspects. You had to depend on
somebody else to provide that. The only thing is
you just
just by force that you change the character of the
school. Then
from there going to 5th Bomber Command as a
communications officer, I'd say that's one of my
low spots. I've gone to B-29 Transition School and
then you get shipped all over to
to an organization as a communications officer,
and although you were an administrator of a
technical radio school, I still wasn't a
technical officer as far as communications was
concerned. I couldn't
really teach radio, the theory of it. I was
administrator type. And then I always worked
myself out of these communication jobs. I was very
happy with those. But when you get into being the
A3, the operations, deputy for operations in 5th
Bomber Command, deputy of operations for 5th Air
Force, I like those jobs pretty well. Although I
like being in that command of the 315th. I was back
in my was a true element.
Because I just liked to be responsible and
then
the Air Force Security Service would have gone
over. But so, any command job, I was really like to
be the boss. Did, you know, very few men become
generals. Did you consider yourself during your
career ambitious?
Well, yeah, I watched everybody else getting
promoted. Every promotion that came out, you
looked it over and tried to figure out how he got
promoted and you didn't. And did you think that
your advancement was, when you figured these
things out or tried to figure these things out, did
you think that your advancement in the in the
military was because of luck, or fate, or
something that you had no control over, or was it
because of your own actions, your own behavior?
Which was most important? I think your own actions
and your own behavior. I think
that had I been in a different position, I would
have gotten promoted
with or the guy who did get promoted in that
particular job. I mean, he just happened to get
selected for that. And I know that when I came back
from Japan the first time, I was being considered
for a job in the Pentagon being the director of
technical training. It was Air Force-wide.
And the guy, the individual, one of my classmates
who took that, who got that job, and I kind of went to
their war college. So it just happened that I got
selected to war college instead of taking that
job. He and I were probably equally qualified.
Well, he ended up with a four-star, as a four-star
general. It's just one of those, that particular
thing, there's no way of guiding your career
into the lucky spots.
My philosophy, I guess, was that if you do a good
job, you'll come to the attention of the right
people. Maybe that I didn't pay politics, play
enough golf with the boss that he got to know you
better personally. Is that important in the
service? Oh, I think that it's...
Well, it's hard to say. It's not my philosophy of
operation. But you look at some of the people who
did get to be known by their golfing and
personal contact, they seem to get ahead a little
faster than... the ones who really
kept their light under the bushel. In other words,
those people promoted themselves more? Is that
what we're talking about? Well, they got promoted
because they got to be known more.
You have to face the fact. If a guy works as a major in
the Secretary of Defense's office, or a
lieutenant colonel, why then the secretary of
defense, if he sends a note down to the chief of the
staff of the Air Force to promote this guy, the
chances are he's going to get promoted. I mean, he
doesn't have to go through all the selection
process. I think that it's
it's really a problem of getting to be known. I
mean, just like running the radio school at Sioux
Falls, you've got to be known. You've got to be
known by the commanders in Second Air Force who
were cadres, and your contemporaries are the ones
that really promote you, I think. I
don't know, you can't Normally the setbacks that
you have, I think you have to look at them that
although your ego gets bruised rather
thoroughly, maybe if you look back on it, maybe
that's the best thing that happened to you.
Maybe you don't get fired, maybe you get replaced.
And so maybe you change the direction just a little
bit in your career. You've been a success both in
the military and in your civilian career in the
building business. And you've had assignments
and leadership in both the military and in the
civilian. How do you get ahead in both of these? Is
there any difference between getting ahead in the
business world and getting ahead in the military?
Well, there's one major difference. In the
military, when someone verbally tells you
they're going to do something, the chances are
they're going to do it. In the civilian business
world, a lot of people tell you they're going to do
something, and they have no intention of ever
doing it. I mean, it's a question of honesty here?
It's a matter of honesty, as far as I'm concerned.
You think that officers in the Air Corps in general
are more honest than the average businessman? I
would say so, yeah. I'd say honesty in civilian
life is improved by having it in writing. I mean,
it's
very simple. You just can't depend on... on people
to do what they say they're going to do. Whereas in
the military, you've been taught for four years at
the military academy and 30 years in the military
that a man's word is his bond. And
in civilian life, that's just not true. You can't
pay an individual who says that he's completed
your roof without going out and looking at the roof
to see that he has completed it. The chances are he
hasn't completed it. So you just have to check and
double check.
And as I mentioned, Although the executive vice
president of a bank told me when I was getting in a
small business that this is a real fine, small
company. He had lots of contracts. And he knew
doggone well that wasn't exactly true. That they
were in the red. Yeah, they were in the red. And all
he was trying to do is protect himself.
And that type of dishonesty would not happen in the
officer ranks. I don't think so, no. I don't. Well,
it's probably a different situation because when
you're talking to, communicating with officers,
you're not dealing with finances. Sure, not
dealing with money. You're not dealing with money
or protection or loss of money. You're...
you're really talking about efficiency of
operations of an outfit or this type of thing. What
about, oh, I don't know, backbiting to get ahead,
stabbing another officer in the back so you can get
a little leverage on getting that promotion
before somebody else? Is there much of that in the
service? Did you find? No, I don't. It's really not
evident. It's really not evident.
Because I think when you're a staff officer of
General O'Donnell or you're a staff officer of
General Burns, I think you have a lot of loyalty
there that you don't...
You just try to excel in your job and... and not try
to downgrade somebody else's job. But there's a
lot of competition between wings. One wing
commander and another wing commander. But he
doesn't say that Tex Hetherington is no good. He
just says, I'm better. And I think this is
different probably from civilian life. But you
are, I said all you do is try to excel and I think that
probably if you had it do over I would probably
develop a little more positive
promotion of telling them just like the going nine
months without an accident. You announce this,
you work at it, you accomplish it, and then when you
have accomplished it, it's time and we're going to
go six months, Then you invite all the commanders
up and say, come on up, and we'll celebrate going
six months without an accident. So you get
everybody up there to look at your program, and
then you kind of promote yourself that way. And you
think if you would be, I mean, you would have
promoted yourself now. Well, I mean, you would
have. You would have promoted yourself more than
you did. Well, there's a lot of opportunities
where you could, have graphic charts and show as to
what a good base you were running and things of this
sort. Whereas you really didn't go out of your way
to tell people what a good base you thought you had.
And of course you learn that as you
grow up. from your first command at the 350th Air
Division on up. At that time, I should have
promoted them. But at that time, you didn't get the
competition between the bases and various
activities
to promote enthusiasm and things of this sort.
Well, I think that you're taking over a base by
taking over any organization. And I think this is a
problem with even the U.S. government. We just
criticize, criticize, criticize. And when I went
to an in and there base, or an Air Division and took
command of it, why then we just promoted, this is
the best, this is the best, this is the best, and you
just get everybody believing that you're the
best. And when everybody believes they're the
best, then you become the best. But when you get
everybody criticizing and running down, why?
This is a major problem, I think, in running
government. I mean, the president. Everybody
criticized the president. And instead of
promoting the president, I mean, he has a
fantastic job to do, and you just can't have all the
backbiting, the media and the senators and
everybody trying to get ahead. I don't know what
the answer is, but But you have to develop your
enthusiasm. And we're the best. And when you do
that, why, you become the best. OK. We're going to
talk about leadership this afternoon.
Let's talk about one last thing this morning. And
that is, of course, retirement, substantial
change in your life. What were your thoughts?
about your military career on the day that you
retired. Do you remember? Well, you really get
depressed. I'll agree. You really get depressed.
When I retired, my— You were still on Hawaii now,
right? No, no. Or did they fly you back for this? No,
I was shipped back as a patient to Wilfrid Hall. And
the Surgeon General was a friend of mine, so it was
just one of those things that he could do. Although
there's nothing wrong with me, I'd taken a
physical at Andrews at Washington, and they
didn't find anything wrong with me. So I didn't
meet a board, a retirement board, because they
didn't think it was necessary. And then a certain
general said, well, he called me up and said, Tex,
you would do another physical because you had to
move the board. And they said you didn't need a
board. So where do you would like to get another
physical? And I said, well, I just want to go to
Wilford Hall because those people know all about
me. Maybe they'll find something wrong with me. I
can get 10% disability or something, which is a tax
break. And so he said, well, I'll owe you back as a
patient. So he could do that. So I entered the
hospital over there and then he evacuated me back
as a patient although we came back to San Francisco
and then we picked up a new automobile and drove and
so I came back.